# WIT Worlds

A **WIT world** is a higher-level contract that describes a component's capabilities and needs.

In one sense, a world _defines_ a component - it says what interfaces the component exposes for other code to call, and what interfaces the component depends on - but it defines only the surface of a component, not the internal behaviour. This is a useful way to think about "business logic" components, like libraries that export APIs for other components to use. If you're an application or library developer, you'll define custom worlds to expose the functionality of each component you create - and to declare the functionality your component depends on.

In another sense, though, a world defines a _hosting environment_ for components. For example, WASI (the WebAssembly System Interface) defines a "command line" world which imports interfaces such as file I/O, random number generation, clocks and so on - the sort of APIs a piece of code running in a POSIX or Win32 environment might want to call. Worlds like this are more akin to operating systems or server frameworks; unless you're building a Wasm host, you'll never define or implement one of these worlds, only _use_ the worlds these environments define for you. The 'world' concept unifies the "library" and "host" senses at a technical level, which enables some powerful techniques, but can also be daunting when first encountering the component model!

A world is composed of interfaces, but each interface is _directional_ - it indicates whether the interface is available for outside code to call (an "export"), or outside code must fulfill the interface for the component to call (an "import"). These interfaces strictly bound the component. A component cannot interact with anything outside itself except by having its exports called, or by calling its imports. This provides very strong sandboxing; for example, if a component does not have an import for a secret store, then it _cannot_ access that secret store, even if the store is running in the same process.

For a component to run, its imports must be fulfilled, by a host or by other components.  Connecting up one component's imports to another component's matching exports is called _composition_.

* A (trivial) "HTTP proxy" world would export a "receive HTTP requests" interface, and import a "send HTTP requests" interface. A host, or another component, would call the exported "receive" interface, passing an HTTP request; the component would forward it on via the imported "send" interface. To be a _useful_ proxy, the component may also need to import interfaces such as I/O and clock time - without those imports the component could not perform, for example, on-disk caching.
* The "WASI (WebAssembly System Interface) command line" world is a classic example of a "hosting environment" use of the world concept. This world exports APIs such as file I/O, sockets, random number generation, and other POSIX-style functionality, so that application components that depend on this world - that is, command line applications - can use those familiar capabilities.
* A "regex parser" world would export a "parse regex" function, and would import nothing. This declares not only that the component implementing this world can parse regular expressions, but also that it calls no other APIs. A user of such a parser could know, without looking at the implementation, that is does not access the file system, or send the user's regexes to a network service.

> ⓘ For a more formal definition of what a WIT world is, take a look at the [WIT world specification](https://github.com/WebAssembly/component-model/blob/main/design/mvp/WIT.md#wit-worlds).
